---
layout: blog
style: base
title: = Calculus
ititle: Lambda, simplified
summary: |-
  A dialect of Lambda Calculus that enhances clarity.
tags: math compsci projects
---
Hi there! This is an unfinished project that is currently more of a concept
than a project. It also serves as a placeholder post on
[my site](https://elliouros.github.io), which I can only assume you are on
now. Either way, this is the specification of a syntax and contains no
matching implementation. For that, look towards
[the actual project on github](https://github.com/elliouros/lambda) (if it's
private, I haven't got it in working order yet.)

# Simplified Lambda Calculus Specification

The Equals Calculus, if you will, but please don't.

## Symbols

### =

Syntactically similar to the lambda. `=x` defines a function that takes in x.

Any symbol can be used, as long as it is a single, otherwise free symbol.
Understand that this syntax is rather loose in its symbology, so long as each
symbol's purpose is easily discernable.

### Brackets \( \[\], \(\), \{\} \)

Syntcatically similar to parentheses, although different. \[xy\] notates the
application of x to y- however, it also notates the return of a lambda. That
is, `Lx.x` = `=x[x]`.

All brackets function exactly the same- The difference is notational at most.
One may certainly, however, use these brackets to discern between different
parts of a lambda- for example, you may wish to use [] for all lambda
definitions and () for applications. It is entirely up to the user. Again,
*notational*.

However, it may be implemented by an interpreter that an error is thrown when
there are mismatched brackets. Ideally, though, if a compiler were ever to be
made, such a thing would not exist, since multiple types of brackets would need
to reserve more values, thus being inoptimal.


### Everything else

Notates an argument as taken in by a function.

## Reasoning

The sense in which this syntax is simplified is this: It does not use the
nonstandard symbol lambda, and it is more easily readable (though it can also
more easily get ugly). Expressions that are abstract if not for their scope
(see: S) are made less abstract. Additionally, there is one less symbol used-
the `.` is omitted in favor of brackets.

### Is it really simplified?

...Barely, I consider it so. The dot only matters in the case that we define
`Lxyz. ...` to be `Lx.Ly.Lz. ...`, which is an abstraction over pure, untyped
Lambda. Also, this use case is covered by the use of brackets to denote
definition anyways- See Abstraction.

Additionally, there is my argument about clarity of scope; however, the
experienced lambda calculator will just use parentheses, I suspect. On
average, it is likely that regular Lambda syntax uses less charaters, but mine
will use less if Lambdas are applied to Lambdas in single statements (like Y).

## Examples

These exmaples are the same from
[Tromp's Lambda Diagrams](https://tromp.github.io/cl/diagrams.html). Check them
out too; [This video](https://youtu.be/RcVA8Nj6HEo), that made heavy use of
those diagrams, was what inspired this project, after all.

As said in the brackets subsection, the different brackets used are purely
notational. I will use [] for definition, () for application, and {} for both.

|term   |definition            |simplified            |
|-------|----------------------|----------------------|
|I/1    |`Lx.x`                |`=x[x]`               |
|K/true |`Lx.Ly.x`             |`=x[=y[x]]`           |
|false/0|`Lx.Ly.y`             |`=x[=y[y]]`           |
|S      |`Lx.Ly.Lz.(xy)(yz)`   |`=x[=y[=z{(xy)(yz)}]]`|
|Y      |`Lf.(Lx.xx)(Lx.f(xx))`|`=f{=x(xx)=x(f(xx))}` |
|2      |`Lf.Lx.f(fx)`         |`=f[=x{f(fx)}]`       |
|3      |`Lf.Lx.f(f(fx))`      |`=f[=x{f(f(fx))}]`    |
|4      |`Lf.Lx.f(f(f(fx)))`   |`=f[=x{f(f(f(fx)))}]` |

## Abstraction

Personally, I dislike abstracting away currying and such- however,
theoretically, this syntax supports that abstraction no less than the standard
notation- and the advantages of abstraction are not lost on me.

|term   |definition     |simplified      |
|-------|---------------|----------------|
|K/true |`Lxy.x`        |`=xy[x]`        |
|false/0|`Lxy.y`        |`=xy[y]`        |
|S      |`Lxyz.(xy)(yz)`|`=xyz{(xy)(yz)}`|
|etc... |               |                |

Bleh. Whatever.
